Hello and welcome to this video all about finite element exterior calculus.
This is the topic of my bachelor thesis and I want to give you a broad overview
on this topic since there are seemingly no approachable resources on this
topic, even though it is actually very cool. It probably helps to have some
familiarity with the finite element method and it might even help if you've
seen some concepts from differential geometry before. Let's get right into it.
So, you can think of finite element exterior calculus as being a marriage of
the two theories of the finite element method and of exterior calculus. And
really it just means that we want to formulate them using differential forms.
So differential forms are the object at study in exterior calculus. And FEEC,
the shorthand for finite element exterior calculus, really tackles the weak
variational form of the PDE and tries to solve PDEs in this framework. Exterior
calculus, what is this exactly? So really you can think of this as being a
model formulation of traditional vector calculus. And it is kind of calculus
on Riemannian manifolds. So this is really rooted in differential geometry.
And it unifies all the different kinds of integrals and derivatives you would
find in vector calculus into basically just one object. And this generalizes
then to arbitrary dimensions. Vector calculus sometimes is kind of limited
to only two or three dimensions since in high dimensions things like the curl
doesn't work anymore. So what is a differential form? A differential K-form is
basically just an integrand, a K-dimensional integrand. For instance, we can
have a 1-form living in the space of 1-forms and it is basically just a line
integrand. You can integrate this over some curve. You can have a 2-form, which
is an area integrand, which you can integrate over a surface. And you can have
a 3-form, which is like a volume integrand, which you can integrate over a 3D
patch of volume. And so a differential form then can just be integrated over a
sub-manifold. And a differential K-form can be integrated over a K-dimensional
sub-manifold. So you just write an integral sign and then the differential form
directly comes because it has the coefficients and these differential terms
with respect to which you are integrating. And you can kind of think of these
differential K-forms as being K-dimensional rulers. These rulers vary across
the manifold according to these coefficient functions we've seen in blue. And
at each point specifically we have a fixed ruler, which locally measures the
tangential K-vectors. And if we then do the whole integration, we globally
measure the K-dimensional sub-manifold. So this is really a unified theory of
integration for arbitrary dimensions. So after unifying integrals, we want to
now unify derivatives. And there are really three central derivatives in vector
calculus. The gradient, the curl, and the divergence. And they can all be
written using basically just one derivative in exterior calculus, which is the
exterior derivative. So these are unified. And if we now combine the unification
of integrals and derivatives, we can even unify the main theorems from vector
calculus. The gradient theorem, the curl theorem, the divergence theorem into
just one, which is Stokes' theorem, saying that the integral over a manifold of
the exterior derivative of a differential form is the same thing as taking the
integral over the original differential form over the boundary of the manifold.
And now, how would one do now finite element exterior calculus? Well, we really
just need to generalize FEM with these differential forms and formulate PDEs
with differential forms. First of all, we need to recognize, since we're now
in the space of differential geometry, we have a more general PDE domain. It
can be any Riemannian manifold. And FEEC allows us to treat domains of full
topological generality, meaning we can have arbitrary number of holes, which
is usually referred to as arbitrary k-Betti numbers. So the k-Betti numbers
measures the number of k-dimensional holes. So we can solve PDEs on the surface
of a sphere, on various tori, and so on. And we need to somehow discretize this
domain to now actually do the finite element method. And this is by means of a
mesh. And really, usually, one knows of these triangle meshes, which discretize
surfaces. But surfaces are just two-dimensional. We, of course, need to
discretize arbitrary dimensional manifolds. So we make use of something called
the simplicial complex. So a simplex is just basically a generalization of a
triangle to arbitrary dimensions. So in zero dimensions, you have just vertices.
In 1D, you have edges. In 2D, you have triangles, as we know it. And in 3D, we
have tetrahedra. And you can extend this arbitrarily. You always have n plus
1 corners of an n-dimensional simple volume of a simplex. And the simplicial
complex really contains all of these. So if we have a volume we're discretizing,
we have tetrahedra. But in the simplicial complex, we also have the faces of
the tetrahedron, so the triangles. And these have, if you take the boundary of
the faces, you get the edges. And if you take the boundary of the edges, you get
the vertices. And all of these are in the simplicial complex, which is always
connected by this boundary operator. And now, to motivate what FEEC really
generalizes, we need to first look at FEM in vector calculus. And in traditional
courses on solving numerical partial differential equations, you usually treat
only scalar-valued PDEs in a Lagrangian finite element context. But one could
also have vector-valued PDEs, meaning the solution is a vector field. And
a great example of this are Maxwell's equations, where we have an electric
field and a magnetic field. And then we write the PDEs using these different
operators. So in Lagrangian finite elements, you would usually use the gradient,
since the gradient can be applied to a scalar function. And for vector fields,
well, you apply the divergence and the curl. And in Lagrangian finite elements,
you always formulate your variational problems on these function spaces, on
these Sobolev spaces, of which the most common one is H1. The space of all
scalar functions for which the gradient of the function is square integrable.
But since we're now using also divergence and curl, we need Sobolev spaces for
them. So how do they look like? Well, one could also call H1 just H grad, since
this is the operator we're worried about. So we can also define H curl and H
diff. Very easy. So this is the natural extension. And these spaces now have
as elements vector fields. And these spaces are actually very connected. There
is this theory of the de Rham complex, which is this rich algebraic structure
connecting H(grad) with H(curl) and H(div), and eventually L^2. And these are
connected by their respective derivatives. So the image of H grad under the
gradient operator, well, it is contained in H curl. And the image of H curl
under curl is contained in H diff. And the image of H div under div is in L2.
And that is not all. If we apply a differential operator twice, we always get
zero. So if we were to start with the gradient and then apply the curl, we get
zero. And if we first take the curl and then the divergence, we also get zero.
This is because if the images of a differential operator are in the kernel of
the next differential operator. And this is this interesting structure. And this
structure is really important. And we will see it come up a couple of times. So
we now need to devise finite element spaces as discretization of these Sobolev
spaces. They just need to be finite dimensional subspaces of these infinite
dimensional function spaces. And these have been meticulously constructed.
The one you're probably already familiar with is the Lagrangian finite element
space with the Lagrangian basis functions, the 10 functions, on the vertices
of the mesh. And it is a subspace of H grad. There is a subspace of H curl,
which is called the Nédélec space. And there is a subspace of H div called the
Raviart-Thomas space. And they also have basis elements. And these no longer
live on the vertices. But the Nédélec live on the edges. And the Raviart-Thomas
elements live on the faces of the mesh, interestingly. There is some underlying
geometric structure here. And we'll see later on what it is. And in order to
now get a good discretization of our Maxwell's equations, or any PDE, we need
to respect the de Rham complex. Because it really dictates the structure of the
PDE problem. And only if we respect it in our discretization, we will get the
right solution. We will converge to the actual solution. And this means we not
only need subspaces. No, we need subcomplexes. And such a subcomplex is formed
by these finite element spaces we found so far. So the Lagrangian finite element
space is connected with the Nédélec finite element space, which is connected
with the Raviart-Thomas space. And lastly, the L2 space becomes the piecewise
constant discontinuous finite element space. And this is actually a subcomplex
of the original one. Which means, great, we have a good discretization. But for
this, mathematicians needed to meticulously construct these spaces such that
they fulfill this condition, which was kind of hard. And these spaces seem very
separate, really. And this is because of vector calculus. Vector calculus makes
a big distinction between these various sorts of derivatives. Exterior calculus
doesn't. So can we achieve some unification here with exterior calculus? And
can we maybe extend this to arbitrary dimensions? These differential operators
from vector calculus, they really only work in 3D. Maybe also in 2D and 1D.
But in 4D, it's really unclear what the curl should become. So let's look
at what finite element exterior calculus does. So first of all, we need to
rewrite Maxwell's equations such that they don't involve the derivatives from
vector calculus. But they are written using differential forms. The electric
field is a one-form. Because, and this is actually dual to a vector field.
A vector field is a line field, as is also a one-form. It's one-dimensional.
So this is completely normal. But the magnetic field, interestingly enough,
is a two-form. So representing in vector calculus the magnetic field as a
one-form is actually not really the way to go. This is not true to its real
nature. And being a two-form, for instance, forbids magnetic monopoles such
as physics does. So this represents a more truthful representation of physics.
And now we only have these four equations which only involve one derivative,
which is the exterior derivative. And we can go even further and make use
of differential geometry once again. We can formulate Maxwell's equations in
relativistic electrodynamics. Meaning we have these equations now on the 4D
spacetime manifold treating arbitrary curvature of our 4D spacetime due to
gravity. And we can just define two things, the Faraday two-form and the current
three-form. And we're only left with two equations. So this framework is already
very interesting since it gives us a more natural way of expressing Maxwell's
equations. But this is not all. Since we only have one kind of derivative,
the exterior derivative, we really only need one kind of Sobolev space. The
Sobolev space of all differential k-forms for which their exterior derivative
is square integrable. And this is a great unification. And furthermore, these
are actually the same spaces as the grad, curl, and div Sobolev space. They are
isomorphic. So the zero-forms correspond to the gradient space, the one-forms
to curl space, and the two-forms to the divergence space. So we already unified
these. Only thing changing is the index up here, which differential k-form it
is. And actually, we therefore also get the same de Rham space complex. It is
isomorphic to it. But now it is a lot more streamlined. We always only increase
the k in the differential k-form. And all of the spaces are just connected by
the exterior derivative. And this image being contained in the kernel of the
next differential operator is now just the fact that applying the exterior
derivative twice is zero. So this is very simple. And now we can make a very,
very interesting connection, which lies at the heart of finite element exterior
calculus. Remember our simplicial complex. This simplicial complex connects the
various manifolds, the various sub-manifolds of our original manifold through
the boundary operator. So if we're in a three-dimensional space, we can take of
any sub-manifold the boundary, getting us a two-dimensional manifold, and then
a one-dimensional manifold, and so on. And this also forms a complex. And it is
connected by the boundary operator, which also application of it twice leads to
zero. So this seems very, very similar. So why is that? Well, really, this is
a very deep discovery on the connection between the topology of the mesh or the
manifold and the calculus structure of our PDE problem. And this is called the
connection between homology and cohomology. And if we respect this connection,
well, only then we can treat PDE domains of arbitrary topological generality.
And furthermore, not only do we have only one Sobolev space, we only, of
course, only have one kind of finite element space. The space of Whitney
k-forms, which are differential forms, which are piecewise linear over cells.
OK, so this is the most simple one corresponding, for instance, to first-order
Lagrangian finite elements. And the functions, the basis functions, live on
the corresponding simplex of the same dimension. So if you have a differential
k-form, the simplices, the basis functions live on the k-simplices of the mesh.
So this is here a connection between geometry and the differential structure.
And this discretization of placing them there really respects this connection
between homology and cohomology. So the Lagrangian finite elements are here
the Whitney 0-forms, the Nédélec elements are the Whitney 1-forms, and the
Raviart-Thomas are the Whitney 2-forms. And this explains why these live on the
vertices, the edges, and the faces, respectively. Because they're the index of
the geometry dimension, and the Whitney k-form agree. And here again, we need to
look for a subcomplex, and the Whitney k-forms do form such a subcomplex, which
has the same properties giving rise to a good discretization. And more, there is
even more. This is very asymmetric construction. We can extend this to arbitrary
dimensions. You can just increase k on and on, and you can just connect these
Sobolev spaces or Whitney k-form spaces by the exterior derivative. So there is
a very natural extension to arbitrary dimensions here. And furthermore, as it
is common in finite elements, there is not just piecewise linear approximations
of PDE solutions. No, we can find arbitrarily polynomial degree solutions to our
discretized PDEs. So we have these spaces of piecewise polynomial differential
forms for any degree R. So this is extremely general. So to recap, what is FEEC?
Well, it is one thing for sure. It is extremely general. It supports arbitrary
dimensions, arbitrary topological manifolds, arbitrary k-forms, and arbitrary
polynomial degree finite element solutions. It is a theoretical framework
which is very math-heavy for establishing the well-posedness of PDE problems by
respecting the co- and homology. And this is basically one of the best theories
probably for getting actually devising methods that actually converge to the
right solutions of PDEs. And lastly, it is not only a theoretical framework, but
is a manual for creating a FEM library of the same generality as FEEC. And this
is now exactly my bachelor thesis. I'm trying to write a Rust implementation of
finite element exterior calculus on coordinate-free simplicial manifolds. And
this is what I'll be working on. And I hope to create some more videos on these
topics, especially with regards to how to implement this. Thank you so much for
watching. If you want to find the slides which are written in Typst, this new
language, this new typesetting language, which might be the successor to LaTeX,
you can find them on GitHub. And if you want to take a look at my Rust FEEC
library, you can also find it on GitHub. Thank you for listening. And goodbye.
